README.md, before:


# Angle Sensor Filtering & Extremum Tracking

## Overview

This project focuses on transforming raw sensor readings—generated by left/right light‐sensor arrays—into a reliable hitch‐angle estimate by leveraging vehicle speed. The primary objective is to reconstruct a “true” hitch‐angle profile (from a high‐quality reference sensor) in real time, capturing sharp peaks and valleys accurately.

Rather than hard‐coding specific filenames, this workflow is designed to operate on **any new recording** (CSV file) you provide. As long as each CSV follows the same column conventions (left/right sensor sums, a reference angle column, a speed column, and a timestamp), the same preprocessing, filtering, alignment, and evaluation steps will apply.

---

## Directory Structure

```
.
├── README.md                  ← This file (generic instructions)
├── filter_analysis.py         ← Python script (load any CSV, process, plot, metrics)
└── recordings/                ← Place one or more CSV recordings here
    ├── recording_YYYYMMDD.csv ← Example recording file
    ├── another_recording.csv
    └── …
```

- **filter_analysis.py**: Contains all code for loading, preprocessing, filtering, alignment, and performance evaluation. It processes **one recording file at a time**, or can be adapted to loop over multiple files in the `recordings/` folder.
- **recordings/**: Directory where you place each new CSV log. Each file should include:
  - Two sets of light‐sensor sums (left vs. right),
  - A “hitch‐angle reference” column (the clean target),
  - A “speed” column (vehicle speed, in the same time base),
  - A “timestamp” column (e.g. “ESP Time” in milliseconds).

---

## 1. What We’re Trying to Accomplish

1. **Compute a raw hitch‐angle proxy** from left/right sensor sums.
2. **Clean the target reference** by interpolating any zero‐dropouts.
3. **Preprocess speed** by clipping negative values, interpolating zeros (only between first and last movement), and applying a small rolling‐average to remove jitter.
4. **Remove spikes** from the raw proxy with a causal Hampel filter (window=5).
5. **Apply a speed‐aware Kalman filter** (KF_inv) in real time, where process‐noise is scaled by 1/speed.
6. **Detect local extrema (peaks & valleys)** in the clean reference signal to quantify how well each filter preserves high/low points.
7. **Align** each filtered output to the reference by matching extremum indices, so that peak/valley errors can be measured at the correct time points.
8. **Compute metrics** (RMSE, MAE, plus specialized extrema‐MAE) to evaluate performance.
9. **Optionally test alternative filters** (e.g. Savitzky–Golay and hybrid KF_on_SG) on the same recording and compare results.

Because each recording file uses identical column names/patterns, you can simply update the path to the new CSV and re‐run the same script. No rewriting of “File1/File2/File3” is necessary.

---

## 2. Preprocessing Steps (Single Recording)

When you run the analysis script on any new recording:

1. **Load the CSV** into a DataFrame.
2. **Identify columns** via their column‐name patterns:
   - The “hitch‐angle reference” column matches a pattern like `Deichsel`.
   - The “speed” column matches a pattern like `Geschwindigkeit`.
   - Left‐sensor sums match `Durchschnitt_L_SE` and `Durchschnitt_L_Be_SE`.
   - Right‐sensor sums match `Durchschnitt_R_SE` and `Durchschnitt_R_Be_SE`.
3. **Compute the raw proxy**:
   - Define  
     ```
       L = (left‐sensor1 + left‐sensor2 + 16),
       R = (right‐sensor1 + right‐sensor2 + 16).
     ```
   - Compute  
     ```
       raw = 90 + (((L + R) / 2) * (L - R)) / (L * R) * 100.
     ```
4. **Clean the target**:
   - Replace zeros with NaN, then interpolate linearly (forward and backward).
5. **Preprocess speed**:
   - Clip negative values to zero.
   - Between the first and last nonzero sample, replace zeros with NaN and interpolate.
   - Apply a 5‐sample centered rolling mean, filling any NaNs at the ends with zero.
   - This yields a smooth, causal speed estimate for use in the Kalman filter.
6. **Suppress spikes** in the raw proxy using a **causal Hampel filter** (window=5).

---

## 3. Filtering Methods

Once preprocessing is complete, the script applies one or more of the following filters to `cleaned_raw`:

1. **KF_inv** (Speed‐Aware Kalman Filter)
2. **Savitzky–Golay (SG)**
3. **KF_on_SG** (KF_inv applied to SG output)

Customize by commenting/uncommenting the desired method calls in `filter_analysis.py`.

---

## 4. Extrema Detection & Alignment (Single Recording)

1. **Detect True Extrema**: local maxima/minima of `target_clean` with 10% prominence.
2. **Detect Filtered Extrema**: local maxima/minima of each filtered output with 10% of that series’ range.
3. **Align by Extrema**:
   - For each true extremum index, find nearest filtered extremum index, compute shift = (filtered_idx - true_idx).
   - Take median(shift) = `lag`. Circularly shift filtered output by `-lag`.
   - Now filtered peaks/valleys coincide with true peaks/valleys.

---

## 5. Scaling Optimization

After alignment, each filtered output is rescaled by searching a dense grid of
reference angles and scale factors. Reference candidates are drawn from the
range of the aligned signal itself, with 200 points concentrated around the
signal mean and clamped to its min/max. For every reference, scale factors from
0.8 to 1.2 (100 steps) are tested. The pair that minimizes overall MAE selects
the reference; then, with that reference fixed, the scale factor giving the
lowest **Extrema_MAE** is chosen. The resulting `ref_angle`, `scale_k`, and
`Extrema_MAE_scaled` are logged for each filter.

---

## 6. Performance Metrics (Single Recording)

After alignment:
- **RMSE**: sqrt(mean squared error over all valid samples).
- **MAE**: mean absolute error over all valid samples.
- **MAPE_pk**: mean absolute error at true-peak indices.
- **MAVE_vl**: mean absolute error at true-valley indices.
- **Extrema_MAE**: mean absolute error over all true-peak+valley indices.
- **Extrema_MAE_scaled**: extrema MAE after the scaling optimization.
- **RMSE_scaled**: RMSE after scaling optimization.
- **MAE_scaled**: MAE after scaling optimization.

---

## 7. How to Use

1. **Place recording(s)** (CSV files) in `recordings/`.
2. **Edit `filter_analysis.py`**:
   - Set `file_path = "recordings/your_recording.csv"`.
   - Adjust `exclude_first_seconds` if needed (default = 20.0).
3. **Run**:
   ```
   python filter_analysis.py
   ```
   - The console prints performance metrics.
   - Two figures appear:
     1. **General + Alignment** (two‐subplot).
     2. **Detail View** (2×3).

4. **Add new recordings**:
   - Add more CSVs to `recordings/`.
   - Optionally loop over all files by modifying `filter_analysis.py`.
5. **Generated figures** are saved in `results/` as PNG files when you run the
   script. These images are reproducible and don't need to be committed to
   version control.

---

## 8. Next Steps & Customization

- Adjust prominence thresholds or filter parameters as needed.
- Explore additional causal smoothing methods.
- Automate batch processing for multiple recordings.

---

Commit message:

Update README for new trimming and scaling logic

README.md, after:


# Angle Sensor Filtering & Extremum Tracking

## Overview

This project focuses on transforming raw sensor readings—generated by left/right light‐sensor arrays—into a reliable hitch‐angle estimate by leveraging vehicle speed. The primary objective is to reconstruct a “true” hitch‐angle profile (from a high‐quality reference sensor) in real time, capturing sharp peaks and valleys accurately.

Rather than hard‐coding specific filenames, this workflow is designed to operate on **any new recording** (CSV file) you provide. As long as each CSV follows the same column conventions (left/right sensor sums, a reference angle column, a speed column, and a timestamp), the same preprocessing, filtering, alignment, and evaluation steps will apply.

---

## Directory Structure

```
.
├── README.md                  ← This file (generic instructions)
├── filter_analysis.py         ← Python script (load any CSV, process, plot, metrics)
└── recordings/                ← Place one or more CSV recordings here
    ├── recording_YYYYMMDD.csv ← Example recording file
    ├── another_recording.csv
    └── …
```

- **filter_analysis.py**: Contains all code for loading, preprocessing, filtering, alignment, and performance evaluation. It automatically processes **every CSV recording** in the `recordings/` folder.
- **recordings/**: Directory where you place each new CSV log. Each file should include:
  - Two sets of light‐sensor sums (left vs. right),
  - A “hitch‐angle reference” column (the clean target),
  - A “speed” column (vehicle speed, in the same time base),
  - A “timestamp” column (e.g. “ESP Time” in milliseconds).

---

## 1. What We’re Trying to Accomplish

1. **Compute a raw hitch‐angle proxy** from left/right sensor sums.
2. **Clean the target reference** by interpolating any zero‐dropouts.
3. **Preprocess speed** by clipping negative values, interpolating zeros (only between first and last movement), and applying a small rolling‐average to remove jitter.
4. **Remove spikes** from the raw proxy with a causal Hampel filter (window=5).
5. **Apply a speed‐aware Kalman filter** (KF_inv) in real time, where process‐noise is scaled by 1/speed.
6. **Detect local extrema (peaks & valleys)** in the clean reference signal to quantify how well each filter preserves high/low points.
7. **Align** each filtered output to the reference by matching extremum indices, so that peak/valley errors can be measured at the correct time points.
8. **Compute metrics** (RMSE, MAE, plus specialized extrema‐MAE) to evaluate performance.
9. **Optionally test alternative filters** (e.g. Savitzky–Golay and hybrid KF_on_SG) on the same recording and compare results.

Because each recording file uses identical column names/patterns, you can simply drop new CSVs into the `recordings/` directory and re-run the script.

---

## 2. Preprocessing Steps (Single Recording)

When you run the analysis script on any new recording:

1. **Load the CSV** into a DataFrame.
2. **Identify columns** via their column‐name patterns:
   - The “hitch‐angle reference” column matches a pattern like `Deichsel`.
   - The “speed” column matches a pattern like `Geschwindigkeit`.
   - Left‐sensor sums match `Durchschnitt_L_SE` and `Durchschnitt_L_Be_SE`.
   - Right‐sensor sums match `Durchschnitt_R_SE` and `Durchschnitt_R_Be_SE`.
3. **Compute the raw proxy**:
   - Define  
     ```
       L = (left‐sensor1 + left‐sensor2 + 16),
       R = (right‐sensor1 + right‐sensor2 + 16).
     ```
   - Compute  
     ```
       raw = 90 + (((L + R) / 2) * (L - R)) / (L * R) * 100.
     ```
4. **Clean the target**:
   - Replace zeros with NaN, then interpolate linearly (forward and backward).
5. **Preprocess speed**:
   - Clip negative values to zero.
   - Between the first and last nonzero sample, replace zeros with NaN and interpolate.
   - Apply a 5‐sample centered rolling mean, filling any NaNs at the ends with zero.
   - This yields a smooth, causal speed estimate for use in the Kalman filter.
6. **Suppress spikes** in the raw proxy using a **causal Hampel filter** (window=5).

---

## 3. Filtering Methods

Once preprocessing is complete, the script applies one or more of the following filters to `cleaned_raw`:

1. **KF_inv** (Speed‐Aware Kalman Filter)
2. **Savitzky–Golay (SG)**
3. **KF_on_SG** (KF_inv applied to SG output)

Customize by commenting/uncommenting the desired method calls in `filter_analysis.py`.

---

## 4. Extrema Detection & Alignment (Single Recording)

1. **Detect True Extrema**: local maxima/minima of `target_clean` with 10% prominence.
2. **Detect Filtered Extrema**: local maxima/minima of each filtered output with 10% of that series’ range.
3. **Align by Extrema**:
   - For each true extremum index, find nearest filtered extremum index, compute shift = (filtered_idx - true_idx).
   - Take median(shift) = `lag`. Shift the filtered output by `-lag` without wrap-around, repeating the edge values.
   - Now filtered peaks/valleys coincide with true peaks/valleys.

---

## 5. Scaling Optimization

After alignment, each filtered output is rescaled by searching a dense grid of
reference angles and scale factors. Reference candidates are drawn from the
range of the aligned signal itself, with 200 points concentrated around the
signal mean and clamped to its min/max. For every reference, scale factors from
0.8 to 1.2 (100 steps) are tested. The pair that yields the lowest MAE is selected. The resulting `ref_angle`, `scale_k`, and optimized MAE (`MAE_opt`) are logged for each filter.

---

## 6. Performance Metrics (Single Recording)

After alignment:
- **RMSE**: sqrt(mean squared error over all valid samples).
- **MAE**: mean absolute error over all valid samples.
- **MAPE_pk**: mean absolute error at true-peak indices.
- **MAVE_vl**: mean absolute error at true-valley indices.
- **Extrema_MAE**: mean absolute error over all true-peak+valley indices.
- **MAE_opt**: lowest MAE found by the scaling optimization.
- **RMSE_scaled**: RMSE after scaling optimization.
- **MAE_scaled**: MAE after scaling optimization.

---

## 7. How to Use

1. **Place recording(s)** (CSV files) in `recordings/`.
2. **Edit `filter_analysis.py`** if needed:
   - Adjust `exclude_first_seconds` (default = `None`).
   - Update the `trim_seconds` dictionary for per-file start/end trimming.
3. **Run**:
   ```
   python filter_analysis.py
   ```
   - The console prints performance metrics.
   - Two figures appear:
     1. **General + Alignment** (two‐subplot).
     2. **Detail View** (2×3).

4. **Add new recordings**:
   - Just drop additional CSVs into `recordings/` and run the script again.
5. **Generated figures** are saved in `results/` as PNG files when you run the
   script. These images are reproducible and don't need to be committed to
   version control.

---

## 8. Next Steps & Customization

- Adjust prominence thresholds or filter parameters as needed.
- Explore additional causal smoothing methods.
- Automate batch processing for multiple recordings.

---
